To evaluate an alignment between two biological sequences we must use exhaustive algorithms that can score a local alignment (Smith-Waterman) or a global alignment (Needleman-Wunsch). As they are exhaustive algorithms they must take into account ever possible combination of sequence match with gaps. This means that starting from the first letter of seq1 there are three possibilities: to match it with the first letter of seq2 (the score of the match is retrieved from a scoring matrix given to algorithm as input), to match it with a gap or to substitute the first letter of seq2 with a gap. This process must be performed for each letter of the sequences we want to align. To better retrieve all the possible alignments with gaps we must use an algorithm based on dynamic programming. Dynamic programming makes possible to move inside a matrix that considers all the possibilities of alignment and to retrieve every time the best score for the alignment. Indeed the previous best score is tested with all the possible combinations of scores of the next step. Thanks to an implementation we can also store the coordinates of the table from which we retrieve the best score. In this way at the end of the algorithm we can perform the "track-back" to obtain the alignment/s with the highest score.The gaps must be penalised, as they are evolutionary improbable. Moreover, opening a gap can have a penalty that is different (it is less penalised) from the one used to extend (that is more penalised). When two residues are matched we must assign a value to the match. This value is not based on the physical-chemical properties of the residue, but on the log-odds of theprobablity of substitution. This value can be calculated analysing multiple seqeunces alignment and storing avery value into a matrix. There are two mains substitutions matrices: PAM and BLOSUM. PAM matrix was created by Margaret Dayoff that aligned protein sequences (from the cytochrome c family) with a "percentage of admitted mutations" equal to 1 (1 residue among 100 can be mutated). From these sequences she retrieved the probability of substitution for each amino residue. Then to extend the same operation taking in consideration more "evolutionary steps" (=a higher percentage of accepted mutations) she multipied PAM1*PAM1, retrieving PAM2 (and so on). 
On the other hand the BLOSUM matrices are families of matrices. Every BLOSUM matrix is created inside a protein family choosing the sequences having a percentage of identity equal to a threashold (BLOSUM62 = 62% of identity).
From a high scoring alignment it is possible to deduce avolutionary similarities,structural similarities and so functional similarities between two biological sequences.
